Okay, so now that we understand
the basics of c++ pointers.
Let's talk about one of the
main use cases for pointers that
is dynamic memory allocation.
When we're developing software, we
often have no idea how much storage
we're going to need to model our data.
For example, if I'm modeling the
students in my class, how many
students do I allocate storage for.
If I'm using an array to model the
students, then I need to know exactly
how many students I have since once I
allocate an array it's fixed in size.
I know what you're thinking,
hey, didn't you tell us
earlier that we should be using
vectors instead of arrays.
Yes, I did.
And that's still true.
However, it's important to
understand how to allocate memory
dynamically, not just for arrays but
for other data, including objects.
Also, how do you think vectors
work behind the scenes?
They use techniques to allocate and
deallocate memory from the heap.
So we really need to
understand how that works.
In this video, I'll go over
the basics of allocating memory
dynamically from the heap.
All memory that's allocated
dynamically via a pointer comes
from the heap or the free store.
As I said, we'll use dynamic
memory allocation again later
in this course in the context
of object-oriented objects.
So how do you allocate
storage at runtime? Let's see.
We use the new keyword to
allocate storage at runtime.
In this example, we declare int
pointer as a pointer to an integer.
Rather than assigning the address
of some integer variable, as
we've done previously, why don't
we create an integer runtime
that's on the heap and store that
variables addressed in int pointer.
That's pretty cool.
You can see how easy it is.
Int pointer equals new int, that's it.
That's all it takes.
This allocates storage for an
integer on the heap and stores
its address in int pointer.
Now we can use the pointer
to access the integer.
The first output statement
displays the value of int pointer.
This is the address of
the newly created integer.
If we want to get to that integer,
we need to dereference the pointer.
But notice what gets displayed:
a really large integer value.
That's because the integer that was
allocated hasn't been initialized
yet and it contains garbage data.
So in order to assign a value to that
integer on the heap, we dereference
the pointer to get to the integer and
then store 100 in it in this case.
Now when we display the value
of the integer, we get back
100, that's pretty cool.
A couple of things to understand.
When you allocate storage in
this manner, the storage is on
the heap, the allocated storage
contains garbage data until you
initialize it. The allocated
storage does not have a name.
The only way to get to that
storage is via the pointer.
If you lose the pointer because
it goes out of scope or you
reassign it, then you lost your
only way to get to that storage
and you have a memory leak.
I'll talk more about that later.
Finally, when you're done using the
storage, then you must de-allocate
the storage, so that it's again
available to the rest of the program.
Let's see how.
Here you see that we again
have declared int pointer is
a pointer to an int, then we
assign new int to int pointer.
This statement allocates storage
for an integer on the heap and
stores the address of that integer
in int pointer, just like before.
We can use the pointer as we wish.
And then when we're done, we need
to release or deallocate the storage
that we allocated for that integer.
We can do that easily using
the delete keyword followed
by the name of the pointer.
Make sure that the address in the
pointer is an address of storage
that was allocated using new.
We just saw an example of allocating
a single integer dynamically.
You can do the same with doubles,
strings, vectors and so forth.
But in this slide, we'll do
something a little more useful
than allocating a single integer.
How about we allocate an entire array
of integers on the heap at runtime?
In the sample code, we declare a
pointer to an integer called array
pointer and an integer named size.
We ask the user how big
they want the array to be?
This could be the number of
scores on an exam or the number of
temperatures to read and so forth.
Then we use the new operator
with square brackets this time
and the number of elements to
allocate inside the brackets.
This will attempt to allocate
that many integers on the
heap contiguously in memory.
If the storage is successfully
created, then the address of the first
integer is stored in array pointer.
That's pretty easy.
Of course, when we're done
with the memory, we need to
release it or deallocate it.
Let's see the syntax for that.
Here's the same code example, but
the last statement deletes the entire
array that we allocated dynamically.
Notice the square brackets between the
delete and the name of the pointer.
These brackets must be empty.
Do not include anything
inside the brackets.
Okay, let's go to the IDE and
create some storage dynamically.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE, I'm
in the section 12 workspace
in the dynamic memory project.
What I want to do in this
little example is allocate a
single element on the heap.
In this case, we'll do an integer
and point to it from a pointer.
Okay, and we're going to use
the new keyword to do that.
And then after that, we'll
allocate storage for an array,
like we did with the slides.
All right, so let's do this first.
We need a pointer.
We need a pointer to an integer.
And you know what, before we
do that, let's let's talk about
exactly what's going on here.
If you remember when we talked about
our memory model earlier, we've got
our memory model here where we've
got our code is down here. Then we
had our global variables, and then
we had our stack right here, right.
And our stack is where
the function calls happen.
And this is push pop, so we're
pushing and popping activation
records on here, just like before.
Well, we also have a part
of memory called the heap.
It's also called the free store.
All dynamic allocation happens here.
Okay, we can't really do
dynamic allocation on the stack.
It's already doing dynamic
allocation when we push
and pop activation records.
But we can't really decide at runtime
how big those things are going to be.
We can to a point, but not really.
The heap is a free-for-all.
We've got a whole bunch
of memory out there.
We can request that we get a
1000 integers, 2000 integers,
15 objects as much as we want.
But we need to take care of that
heap, and we need to release
the storage when we're done.
So that's the kind of
thing we'll do here.
Now what I want to do is I want
to create an integer pointer
that's going to be in main, so
it's going to be on the stack.
And I want to allocate
an integer on the heap.
So I want to allocate an integer
dynamically on the heap, and I want
to point to it from that pointer.
Okay, that's what I want to do first.
Then what I want to do is I want to
allocate an array of doubles, let's
say, in this case on the heap again.
And how big is it going to be?
I don't know. I'm going to ask the user
how many doubles they need.
And then what we'll have is we'll
have a pointer two doubles in this
case, that's going to point to there.
Okay, so that's what
we're going to do.
Let's start here, let's
do the integer first.
We need a pointer to it, so
we're going to have an integer.
And we'll initialize
it to null pointer.
That's our best practice.
So what we've done now
is we've got a variable.
Remember, it's a variable
called int pointer that points
to an integer, so it's going
to hold addresses of integers.
Right now, it's pointing nowhere.
If we want to allocate this
dynamically at runtime from the heap,
we just say int pointer equals new
and then followed by the type that I
want to allocate, in this case, int.
Now what's going to happen is that
storage for an integer is going to
be allocated on the heap, and its
address will be stored in int pointer.
Okay, so we can just do something
like display int pointer, and that
will display the memory location
where that integer is on the heap.
Remember, that's the address
that's stored in int pointer.
Okay, so let's run that, and you
can see that then hex address
right there, that's where that
integer lives on the heap, and
our pointer is not pointing to it.
It's important to understand
that, that integer that we just
created on the heap has no name.
There's no way to get to it
except through this pointer.
So if I lose the pointer, I've got
something called a memory leak, which
I'll talk a little bit about later.
So at this point, we can use
this integer, however, we like.
And when we're done,
we need to delete it.
So the syntax for that is simply
the keyword delete, followed by
the name of the pointer, which,
in this case, is int pointer,
that frees up the storage.
Okay, so pretty easy.
Now what we'll do is -- let
me clean up a little bit
of this white space here.
Now what we'll do is we'll
create a whole contiguous
block of memory on the heap.
Okay, and we'll do doubles this time.
So there's two things here.
We don't know the size, so
we have to ask the user how
many doubles do you need.
And we also need a pointer
to that area, so we declare
both of those right now.
The size will declare it as a
size type, and we'll just call it
size, we'll initialize it to zero.
And the pointer will be
a pointer to doubles.
And the name of the pointer,
let's just say, temp pointer,
so it'll be like temperatures.
And again, we'll
initialize it to null.
So we're good to go here.
So let's ask the user.
So we'll ask the user we'll
say how many temps,
right, how many temperatures do they need.
And we'll read that into size.
So now we know how many
temperatures to allocate.
So if they typed in 50 100 200 10,000,
whatever they typed in, that's how
much storage we're going to allocate.
So what do we do?
We use the pointer.
We're going to say temp pointer
equals new, what am I allocating?
Well, I'm allocating
doubles, in this case.
And how many size?
This is where you put the
size in the square brackets.
That's going to allocate that chunk of
memory, happens to be an array in this
case because it's contiguous doubles
in memory and store the address
of the first one into temp pointer.
Okay, so at this
point we can say cout.
Let's just say temp pointer,
see what's in there?
Obviously, it's an address
of that first double, right.
And let's run that real
quick see what we get.
So how many temps?
Let's say 100 temperatures.
And you can see right there
that's the area in the heap
that contains the address of
the first of those 100 doubles.
Pretty easy.
Now when we're done, what do we do?
We always need to free up
the space that we allocated.
So we can say delete, in this case,
we allocated an array right there.
You've got the square brackets in the
new call, so here you've got to put
the square brackets and the delete.
Nothing inside the square brackets
and then the name of the pointer
which was temperature pointer.
That's it.
That's the entire program.
And you can see what's
happening at this point, right.
What we did was we had and I'm
not going to draw the whole stack
again, but we had that temp pointer
right here that was on the stack.
We allocated, let's say, 100
doubles on the heap. Temp pointer
is pointing to the first one.
Okay, that's really what's happening.
This is on the heap.
And in this case, temp pointer
was on the stack because it's
local to main right here.
Notice what happens if we lose this
pointer, I mean if we do something
really silly like, I don't know, temp
pointer equals null pointer, right.
And we do that before we did
this, and what just happened?
Well, we just nulled out this pointer.
So this is gone.
We just lost our only way
to get to that storage.
And that's called the memory leak.
What the delete call does is
it frees up this storage again.
Your pointer is still pointing to
it, and that's important because
if you try to use that pointer
again after you've deleted the
storage, you could have really,
really unpredictable results.
But in this case, you don't
want to lose your pointer to a
dynamically allocated memory because
then it's basically orphaned out
there, and that's the memory leak.
Okay, now let's see what
happens if our call fails.
Our call to allocate the size here.
Now I'll do something
that you should never do.
But I'm going to create
an endless loop here.
I'm just going to say
while true allocate that.
So this is going to -- I'm
going to ask you how many
temperatures you want to allocate?
I'm going to type
something like 10000.
And then what I'll do is I'll just
keep looping allocating and creating
memory leaks all over the place.
Eventually, we're going to run
out of memory and the heap.
So eventually, this will fail,
and I should get an exception.
So let's see what that looks like.
How many times, let's say, a lot.
I remember it's going to be
in an infinite loop doing
this over and over and over.
And there you go.
That was pretty fast.
You can see terminate called
after throwing an instance
of standard bad alloc.
So basically what happened
was the call to new failed.
There was no more memory available.
And this is the
exception that's thrown.
We'll talk about exception handling
a little bit later in the class, but
what you want to do is you want to
catch that exception, you don't want
your program to just stop like that.
You want to catch the exception.
And if you can deal with it
somehow, maybe you've got you know
memory and caches and temporary
stuff that you can free up to
free up some memory, and then
you can reallocate this memory
again, trying to call new again.
So this is -- again, I'm
going to delete that.
That's not a good idea.
But that's basically it. In
the next video, we'll talk
about the relationship between
arrays, which is really what's
going on here and a pointer.
You can see, they're really almost
the same thing here in this case.
And how we can actually use that array
that's on the heap from our code.
So I'll be right back.